http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02938v1

The standard consolidation theory states that short-term memories located in
the hippocampus enable the consolidation of long-term memories in the
neocortex. In other words, the neocortex slowly learns long-term memories with
a transient support of the hippocampus that quickly learns unstable memories.
However, it is not clear yet what could be the neurobiological mechanisms
underlying these differences in learning rates and memory time-scales. Here, we
propose a novel modelling approach of the standard consolidation theory, that
focuses on its potential neurobiological mechanisms. In addition to synaptic
plasticity and spike frequency adaptation, our model incorporates adult
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus as well as the difference in size between the
neocortex and the hippocampus, that we associate with distance-dependent
synaptic plasticity. We also take into account the interconnected spatial
structure of the involved brain areas, by incorporating the above
neurobiological mechanisms in a coupled neural field framework, where each area
is represented by a separate neural field with intra- and inter-area
connections. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to apply neural fields
to this process. Using numerical simulations and mathematical analysis, we
explore the short-term and long-term dynamics of the model upon alternance of
phases of hippocampal replay and retrieval cue of an external input. This
external input is encodable as a memory pattern in the form of a multiple bump
attractor pattern in the individual neural fields. In the model, hippocampal
memory patterns become encoded first, before neocortical ones, because of the
smaller distances between the bumps of the hippocampal memory patterns. As a
result, retrieval of the input pattern in the neocortex at short time-scales
necessitates the additional input delivered by the memory pattern of the
hippocampus. Neocortical memory patterns progressively consolidate at longer
times, up to a point where their retrieval does not need the support of the
hippocampus anymore. At longer times, perturbation of the hippocampal neural
fields by neurogenesis erases the hippocampus pattern, leading to a final state
where the memory pattern is exclusively evoked in the neocortex. Therefore, the
dynamics of our model successfully reproduces the main features of the standard
consolidation theory. This suggests that neurogenesis in the hippocampus and
distance-dependent synaptic plasticity coupled to synaptic depression and spike
frequency adaptation, are indeed critical neurobiological processes in memory
consolidation.