http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.11758v1

Abstract Objective In Genetic Absence Epilepsy Rats From Strasbourg ( GAERS
s), epileptogenesis takes place during brain maturation and correlates with
increased mRNA expression of D3 dopamine receptors (D3R). Whether these
alterations are the consequence of seizure repetition or contribute to the
development of epilepsy remains to be clarified. Here, we addressed the
involvement of the dopaminergic system in epilepsy onset in GAERS s. Methods
Experiments were performed using rats at different stages of brain maturation
from three strains according to their increasing propensity to develop absence
seizures: nonepileptic control rats ( NEC s), Wistar Hannover rats, and GAERS
s. Changes in dopaminergic neurotransmission were investigated using different
behavioral and neurochemical approaches: autoradiography of D3R and dopamine
transporter, single photon emission computed tomographic imaging, acute and
chronic drug effects on seizure recordings (dopaminergic agonists and
antagonists), quinpirole-induced yawns and dopamine synaptosomal uptake,
microdialysis, brain tissue monoamines, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
quantification. Results Autoradiography revealed an increased expression of D3R
in 14-day-old GAERS s, before absence seizure onset, that persists in
adulthood, as compared to age-matched NEC s. This was confirmed by increased
yawns, a marker of D3R activity, and increased seizures when animals were
injected with quinpirole at low doses to activate D3R. We also observed a
concomitant increase in the expression and activity of the dopamine transporter
in GAERS s before seizure onset, consistent with both lowered dopamine basal
level and increased phasic responses. Significance Our data show that the
dopaminergic system is persistently altered in GAERS s, which may contribute
not only to behavioral comorbidities but also as an etiopathogenic factor in
the development of epilepsy. The data suggest that an imbalanced dopaminergic
tone may contribute to absence epilepsy development and seizure onset, as its
reversion by a chronic treatment with a dopamine stabilizer significantly
suppressed epileptogenesis. Our data suggest a potential new target for
antiepileptic therapies and/or improvement of quality of life of epileptic
patients.